Complete thesis avalable at: https://escholarship.mcgill.ca/concern/theses/2z10ww31z

# Predicting post-Stroke Cognitive Impairments from Lesion Topography using Machine Learning

## Abstract

**Background:** Stroke is the fourth and fifth leading cause of death in Canada and the United States respectively. Survivors of stroke live with mild to severe life-long impairments. Early rehabilitation can improve long-term outcomes of stroke patients and improve their quality of life. Accurate prediction of post-stroke cognitive impairments at an individual patient level may aid the development of personalized treatments and intervention strategies.

**Methods:** We applied and benchmarked machine learning methods on a relatively large stroke dataset (n=1401) to predict cognitive outcomes from lesion topography. The dataset included MRIs (Structural axial T1, T2-weighted spin echo, DWI and FLAIR sequence) of ischemic stroke patients carried out within 7 days from the onset of stroke and their neuropsychological assessments including measures for global cognition, language, memory, visuospatial functioning, information processing speed and executive functioning at 3 months. Three approaches to analyzing brain-behavior relationships from a predictive analytics standpoint were explored and compared in terms of out-of-sample prediction performance of post-stroke cognitive functions based on 5-fold nested cross- validation: 1) multi-outcome models vs single-outcome models; 2) non-linear models vs linear models; and 3) data augmentation (Mixup).

**Results:** The out-of-sample coefficient of determination (r-square) values in all approaches are generally low and inconsistent across cross-validation folds indicating poor predictive performance. However, we see that: 1) joint modeling of interrelated cognitive functions exhibits potential to perform more accurate predictions in the domains of global cognition and language; 2) non-linear models could potentially be exploited to improve individualized predictions in the domains of language and memory; and 3) it is not easy to exploit artificial samples generated by Mixup to improve the predictive performance of cognitive functions post-stroke.

**Conclusion:** Prediction of single patient outcomes from lesion topography is a difficult task with the quality and quantity of neuroimaging data currently available for stroke. This work highlights the challenges and provides useful directions to future research in lesion-behavior mapping.

